The final stages of food digestion
take place in the large intestine or colon.
After nourishment is extracted from what we eat,
the leftover waste material mixed with water
flows from the small intestine into the colon.
After entering the colon,
stool loses water as it
travels upward through the ascending colon
and across the belly through the transverse colon.
As water is lost,
stool returns from a liquid
into a solid
as it goes down toward the rectum
in the descending colon.
Stool is moved through the sections of the colon
by waves of squeezing muscles
in an action called peristalsis.
Constipation can occur if
too much water is absorbed from the stool
or if peristalsis is slowed down.
Many other factors can also play a role,
such as a poor diet low in fiber,
emotional stress,
or other medical conditions.